Project

REF: Resource Evaluation and Feedback DSL

Project Assignment P1: Modeling

#### ENORM

### Master in Informatics Engineering - 2025/

### Porto, February 22, 2026

### Alexandre Bragança (ATB),

### Rafael Gonçalves (RCC)

### Version 5, 2026-02-



Revision History

Revision Date Author(s) Description

1 2026-02-11 atb Initial version
2 2026-02-13 atb First complete version
3 2026-02-16 atb Add Reddit picture and minor other updates
4 2026-02-19 atb Minor x
5 2026-02-19 atb Updates submissition of P1 to 18 of April

```
iii
```


## Contents

- 1 Context
    - 1.1 The Problem
    - 1.2 REF: A DSL for Resource Evaluation and Feedback
        - 1.2.1 Simple, Intuitive and Easier to Learn
        - 1.2.2 Strongly Typed
        - 1.2.3 Complete
        - 1.2.4 Flexible and Extensible
        - 1.2.5 Evolvable
    - 1.3 DSL Engineering
        - 1.3.1 Domain Engineering
        - 1.3.2 Application Engineering
- 2 Organization and Process
    - 2.1 Teams and Tools
    - 2.2 Repositories
    - 2.3 Reports
    - 2.4 Process
    - 2.5 Submission
- 3 Domain Engineering
    - 3.1 Domain Knowledge
    - 3.2 Metamodel
    - 3.3 Metamodel Constrains
    - 3.4 Model Transformations
    - 3.5 Model Visualizations/Projections
- 4 Terms and conditions
    - 4.1 Submission
    - 4.2 Report


Contents

```
4.3 Deadline....................................... 21
4.4 Feedback....................................... 21
4.5 Evaluation...................................... 21
4.6 Grading........................................ 22
4.6.1 Grading Criteria.............................. 22
4.7 Code of Conduct................................... 23
```
```
vi
```

List of Figures

1.1 A simple textual syntax (fromhttp://www.wcse.org/WCSE_2017/041.pdf 3
1.2 An Example of Graphical syntax based on BPMN (fromhttps://pdfs.semanticscholar.
org/caf5/ee06b4ec40099ae5ee7f803ef10a59b2fe25.pdf......... 3
1.3 Domain Engineering................................. 5
1.4 Application Engineering............................... 6

3.1 Reddit Automations.................................. 16
3.2 An example diagram generated by Plantuml/dot................. 19

```
vii
```


Listings

3.1 Excerpt of possible textual projection for a REF model.............. 18
3.2 Example of Plantuml/dot source code for generating a diagram......... 18

```
ix
```


```
Chapter
```
## 1 Context

This document describes the rst part (P1) of the ENORM project, which overall goal is the
exploratory development of tools in the context of a Software Product Line. Specially, the
aim is to develop a domain-specic language and some other supporting tools. This chapter
presents an overview of the ENORM project, focusing on part P1 of the project. Chapter 2
presents some guidelines on the organization and procedures to be used. Chapter 3 presents
details of the development of the core assets of the product line. Finally, Chapter 4 presents
the terms and conditions of the project.

### 1.1 The Problem

The ENORM project considers the simplied case of a software company that is specialized in
the development of web based solutions.The company has developed several web solu-
tions and, through the years it has identify some commonalities in those solutions.
Resulting from this constact it has decided to explore thoseusing a software product line
(SPL) approach. In the context of the new SPL approach, it will also explore the use of a DSL.
The ENORM project regards the exploration of this DSL.

The great majority of theweb solutions developed by the company include some sort
of user evaluation or feedback features. For instance, in e-commerce applications it is
very common to allow users to evaluate the products they buy. Similarly, in web applications
were users post content (such as videos or photos) it is usual to give users the possibility to
comment on such posts.

One of the technical aspects ofthese solutions is that they rely on a REST architecture,
and the backend is composed of several REST API based microservices that are very similar.
The rst approach of the company was to use a DSL to help developers create these APIs. As
such, the company developed a DSL that helped developers generate a signicant part of the


1 Context

code^1.
The results of this initial DSL where promising. However, the DSL is technical and aimed
at software engineers. The company now whishesto explore a more high level DSL, one
that can be used by subject matter experts (SME). The ENORM project is this next phase
of the exploration of this approach.The main objetives are to build a MVP of a DSL that:

- can generate at least 90% of the code required to implement the backend microservices
  that support the users feedback and evaluation of the web applications produced by the
  company;
- can be used by subject matter experts as they describe/specify their needs in this context;
- supports both textual and graphical syntaxes;

```
The next section will present more specic aims of the project.
```
### 1.2 REF: A DSL for Resource Evaluation and Feedback

The goal for the project is to produce a DSL called REF (Resource Evaluation and
Feedback). As described before, this DSL is inspired by previous work of the company de-
veloping a DSL for REST API creation. The previous DSL targeted the software engineers of
the company, reducing the time they spent coding very similar REST web services. This ex-
perience was sucessful, and now the company wants evolve even further the usage of DSLs
to new users. This time it is targeting the subject matter experts (SME). These are usually
professionals from the clients of the company that know very well the business domain, but
do not have the technical skills for developing the solutions, they are not software engineers.
The aim is now to create e new DSL that will be used by these SME to specify theirs
domain applications. Based on these application specications done with the new DSL, it
shoud be possible to generate the majority of the code. The software engineers that previously
developed the solutions will be trained to be able create and maintain the DSL as well as coding
the possible 10% of code that will not be generated by the DSL.
The following sections detail some main characteristics that the DSL should support.

#### 1.2.1 Simple, Intuitive and Easier to Learn

The DSL should be simple and easier to learn. It should be as much intuitive as possible for
the subject matter expert.
The company made some research about DSL syntaxes and found some examples for other
domains. For instace, Figure 1.1 and Figure 1.2 present examples of textual a graphical syntaxes
of DSLs aimed at modeling Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) processes.

(^1) A solution similar to the one available inhttps://github.com/HachimHassani/Rest-DSL


```
1.2 REF: A DSL for Resource Evaluation and Feedback
```
The textual syntax of the new DSL should be simple and easier to learn.It should be, as
much as possible, close to how a person would describe the application in natural
language.

```
Figure 1.1: A simple textual syntax (fromhttp://www.wcse.org/WCSE_2017/041.pdf
```
Regarding the graphical notation, it should also be simple anduse intuitive graphical
elements. It should avoid cluterring the diagrams with to much detail.A common way to
avoid clutering is to display detail as text in property windows.

Figure 1.2: An Example of Graphical syntax based on BPMN (from https://pdfs.
semanticscholar.org/caf5/ee06b4ec40099ae5ee7f803ef10a59b2fe25.
pdf

#### 1.2.2 Strongly Typed

The DSL should be strongly typed, in order to help its users (SME) to avoid specication errors
when writing DSL programs. Basicaly, the ideia is thatwhen the user ends the creation of


1 Context

a DSL program, that program/specication should always be a valid specication so
that the generated code is also always valid.

#### 1.2.3 Complete

A domain usually includes not only structural but also behavioral elements. They take form as
rules or processes that apply to the domain. We expect that this also applies to this REF domain.
Therefore, it is expected thatthe new DSL includes support to model both structural and
behavioral aspects of the domain.

#### 1.2.4 Flexible and Extensible

Although the DSL should be simple and provide the most common features for the resource
evaluation and feedback domain, it is possible that these functionalities do not cover all the
cases. Therefore, the DSL should be extensible and exible by, for instance,providing an
extensibility mechanism that the SME can use to add new operators/functions in the
DSL that are then implemented by a software engineer in the base programming lan-
guage (e.g., java).

#### 1.2.5 Evolvable

The DSL should be designed to support its evolution. When working with DSLs their evolution
is a mandatory feature. If a DSL is to be successfully used it must be designed up-front thinking
that it will, sooner or later, require changes. Therefore,it is required to prepare the DSL
with the necessary tools to support the migration of DSL programs to new versions
of the DSL.

### 1.3 DSL Engineering

The development process is divided in two levels: domain engineeringandapplication
engineering. These levels of engineering, although connected, are usually performed by very
different roles. Domain engineering requires someone that is expert in building domain tools,
such as domain-specic languages. Application engineering requires another role, someone
which will use the previous domain tools (e.g., DSL) to build applications in the domain. This
requires knowledge in the domain, but not on building domain tools (e.g., building DSLs),
usually this is the role of the subject matter expert. For the ENORM project, you should have
to play the two roles.


```
1.3 DSL Engineering
```
#### 1.3.1 Domain Engineering

Domain engineeringis responsible for developing reusable artifacts, i.e., domain-specic ar-
tifacts that are reused when building domain applications. In this particular case, the goal is
to develop adomain-specic language and supporting processes/tools(e.g., model vali-
dations, model transformations and code generation) for building applications (in this specic
case, backend services of the applications) (see Figure 1.3). The artifacts that result from do-
main engineering are then used at the level ofapplication engineeringthat, obviously, in
this case, will use the REF DSL to model and generate backend sevices that support resource
evaluation and feedback processes of applications for the domain (see Figure 1.4).
For this part of the project (P1), the major goal is to design the metamodel of the
new REF language. This includes not only the structure of concepts (its properties
and relations) but also model validations and model transformations (refactorings).
To construct the metamodel, domain knowledge must be extracted from studying documents
and talking to the subject matter experts (in this case, teachers will play this role). With,
this knowledge, a design for the metamodel of the new language must be proposed that tries
to comply with the previous presented aims and tries to support the specic requirements
presented in section 3. You should also comply with the instructions of the laboratoy class
teacher that, in some way, will play the roles of subject matter expert and product owner.
For this part of the project (P1), it is not necessary to develop the full DSL!You are
only required to build the parts described previously. It is not required to design and build the
concrete syntax of the DSL, only if the tool you use requires it. If so, you may develop a "raw"
syntax only to support the aims of P1. Therefore,for P1, you are not required to design the
concrete syntax of the DSL and you are not required to generate code. It is, however,
also required to develop the tasks described in the next section (Section 1.3.2), that are related
to application engineering.

```
Figure 1.3: Domain Engineering.
```
#### 1.3.2 Application Engineering

Application engineers reuse the tools developed in domain engineering (e.g., DSLs) to cre-
ate domain applications, as depicted in Figure 1.4. When the reusable tool is a DSL the
application engineer role can potentially be played by a subject matter expert.
Since the goal of this project is to evaluate the feasibility of this apporach in an MVP, it was
decided to replicate three well-known cases of REF. Therefore, you should demonstrate the


1 Context

```
Figure 1.4: Application Engineering.
```
solution with the following cases, that are briey described:

- Case 1: Youtube: In this case the evaluated resources are user videos. Users can com-
  ment other users’ videos and ’rate’ them using thumbs up or down. Also, comments
  may start threads. Comments are usually sorted by date or "value". Users may report
  comments that violate community rules;
- Case 2: Amazon: In this case the evaluated resources are the products that users buy.
  Users can evaluate products. Usually users that evaluate products are also buyers, but
  this rule is not mandatory. Users classify the products using a ve start grading scale.
  The evaluation includes text but may also include photos and videos. There is also a
  verication process for evaluations that can be manual or automatic;
- Case 3: Reddit: In this case the resource is similar to a discussion forum that has a
  specic topic. Users can post in the forum. There are different types of posts. When users
  reply to posts they create discussion threads. Users can evaluate posts and comments
  by "upvoting" and "downvoting" on them. Users may report on posts and comments.
  Each topic has its own rules and moderators. The platform supports a mechanism to
  automate some related processes.

The developed DSL must support all these three scenarious. It is up to you to research
the specic requirements and features of these 3 scenarious. The previous description is only
a high level overview of features.
The company is expecting that the designed DSL includes/supports the following require-
ments:

- Structure: it should be possible tomodel the diverse properties of resources;
- Authorization: it should be possible tomodel the diverse users/actors that interact
  with the application and what operations can they perform;
- Behaviour: it should be possible tomodel the diverse processes related to the ac-
  tions on the resource, such as moderation processes and automatic validations. Reddit
  seems particularly powerfull in this regard, and the company is expecting support for
  something similar to Reddit’sAutomations.


```
1.3 DSL Engineering
```
Remember that the goal of this MVP is to initially support at least these scenarious. It does
not have to mimic exactly the three applications, but it must support similar applications. Also,
the ideia is thatthe DSL should support its evolution, as new scenarios are identied
and the DSL is updated to support them.
The modeled scenarios should provide sucient data to demonstrate and test the
major features of the DSL regarding its structure, validations and refactorings.



```
Chapter
```
## 2 Organization and Process

This ENORM project is divided in three parts or components:

- P1 Modeling
    - This is the rst part of the development of the DSL, focusing on modeling
    - It starts at week 2 and its planned to end by the middle of the semester (at the end
      of week 7)
    - It is the part that is described in this document
    - This is a team component with individual activities and individual grading
- P2 DSL and Code Generation
    - This is the second part of the development of the DSL, focusing on the DSL and
      code generation
    - It is planned to start at the beginning of week 8 and ending at the end week 12
    - It will be described in another document
    - This is a team component with individual activities and individual grading

```
This document only describes the requirements forP1 Modeling.
```
### 2.1 Teams and Tools

Students should form teams of three elements (exceptionally teams can have less members,
but only with the teacher’s acceptance).
Each member of the team is responsible for the development of the solution using a specic
tool. You shouldcheck the technical requirements for the installation and usage of the
tool, e.g., some tools may have specic requirements.


2 Organization and Process

Each team member should select a unique tool from the following ones. All members of the
same team should select different tools.

- MPS - Meta Programming System
    - Site:https://www.jetbrains.com/mps/
    - Documentation:https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/mps-user-s-guide.
      html
    - Tutorial video:https://youtu.be/T1RErEvbgRc
- Xtext
    - Site:https://www.eclipse.org/Xtext/
    - Documentation:https://www.eclipse.org/Xtext/documentation/index.html
    - Demonstration/Tutorial video:https://vimeo.com/
- Sirius
    - Site:https://www.eclipse.org/sirius/
    - Documentation:https://www.eclipse.org/sirius/doc/
    - Advanced documentation available athttps://wiki.eclipse.org/Sirius/Tutorials/
      AdvancedTutorial
    - Tutorial videos:
      ∗Part 1https://youtu.be/uKBGVwmRzi
      ∗Part 2https://youtu.be/3rnBmG4DN4w
      ∗Part 3https://youtu.be/hOU62wf3bYs
      ∗Part 4https://youtu.be/MlRdRsLic_k
      ∗Part 5https://youtu.be/iHtmL-PKT8c
      Attention for Sirius and Xtext Tools: These tools are based on EMF. They can use a
      metamodel created as an ecore metamodel, as described in the following tutorialhttps://
      [http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseEMF/article.html.](http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseEMF/article.html.) Therefore, in the case of these
      tools, you may follow this tutorial to learn how to create ecore metamodels (or follow the
      demonstrations from the lectures)
      The students may select other tools but only with the teacher’s acceptance.

### 2.2 Repositories

Each team will have access to a team repository that should be used to develop the two team
components: P1 Modeling and P2 DSL and Code generation. Further instructions will be avail-
able in the team repository.


### 2.3 Reports

### 2.3 Reports

For each part of the project (P1 and P2) there will be a report to be produced. All reports are
produced inside the repositories using Markdown. Further instructions related to the reports
will be available in the repositories.
For this part of the project (P1), the report is included in the team repository. However, the
report is further divided in two parts: a team part and individual parts. Team and Individual
parts are to be developed and reported according to instructions in Section 2.4 and also specic
teacher’s indications.

### 2.4 Process

The proposed process for P1 Modeling is structured in the following activities. Usually they
should be developed in a sequential way, for instance, one in each week. But this organisation
is not mandatory, the team should organize the work as best ts their needs.

- Activity 1: Team formation and Tool Research
    - Team tasks:
      ∗Select members of the team
      ∗Study the proposed tools
      ∗Add to the component P1 a report with a briey description of each tool
- Activity 2: Specic Tool Setup
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Each student should select his/her tool
      ∗Each student should install his selected tool and try to experiment with the
      tools, following the tutorial videos presented previously
      ∗Add to the team repository a report (individual section), a description of the
      tool and instructions on how to install and setup the tool
- Activity 3: Research Existing Knowledge
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Each student should study and explore the domain knowledge of one of the
      scenarious described in Section 1.3.2
      ∗Each student should produce a domain model for one application scenario
      ∗See Chapter 3 for further instructions and requirements


2 Organization and Process

```
∗Add to the report (individual section) the domain knowledge obtained from
analyzing the languages (including the domain model)
```
- Activity 4: Design Domain Metamodel
    - Team tasks:
      ∗Design a metamodel that supports the new DSL (it should be supported and
      justied using the knowledge from the previous activity)
      ∗Use a formal notation (e.g., class diagram or similar)
      ∗Add to the report (team section) the design of the metamodel
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Implement the designed metamodel in the selected tool
      ·Note:Xtext and Sirius are based on EMF, therefore it is possible to use
      EMF/Ecore to implement the metamodel
      ·MPS:For MPS you should useStructure
      ∗Add to the report (individual section) a description of the implementation of
      the metamodel
- Activity 5: Design Metamodel Constraints and Transformations
    - Team tasks:
      ∗Further analyse the domain applications to add constraints to the metamodel
      ∗Use a formal notation (e.g., OCL) or, at least, pseudo-code
      ∗Include for each constraint, when possible, a proposal of a refactoring to cor-
      rect the model error
      ∗Add to the report (team section) the design of the metamodel constraints and
      refactorings
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Implement the designed constraints and refactoring in the selected tool
      ·XtextUse the wizard "Xtext Project from Existing Ecore Models" to cre-
      ate an Xtext DSL that is based on your previous metamodel. This will
      automatically generate a default textual representation for the DSL. Use
      this default representation. In part 2 of the project you will focus on the
      textual representation (not now). You can use Xtext’sValidation Rules
      andQuick Fixesfor this activity.
      ·SiriusTo be able to use the specic features of Sirius you need to imple-
      ment a basic/minimum graphical representation for your DSL. You can
      use Sirius’Validation RulesandQuick Fixesfor this activity.


```
2.4 Process
```
```
·MPSMPS automatically provides a default editor for the DSL. Therefore
you do not need to implement one for this part of the project. You can use
MPS’Checking RulesandQuick Fixesfor this activity.
∗Add to the report (individual section) a description of the implementation of
the constraints and refactorings
```
- Activity 6: Design Model Projections/Visualizations
    - Team tasks:
      ∗Research for textual and graphical notations for building model projection-
      s/visualizations for the new DSL
      ∗Do not forget that graphical projections/visualizations will be supported by
      plantuml (https://plantuml.com)
      ∗Add to the report (team section) a description on how each metamodel element
      will be represented (graphically and textually)
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Implement the designed visualizations in the selected tool (or by any other
      means when not possible to integrate visualizations/projections with the tool)
      ·XtextYou can use the generation features of Xtext to generate the Plan-
      tUML le (usingCode Generation). Alternatively,Custom Validation
      andQuick xescould be used to execute Java code that generates the
      PlantUML le (although this is not the intended design usage for quick
      xes). A similar approach can be used to generate a textual projection for
      DSL models.
      ·SiriusUsually for Sirius a tool named Acceleo is used for code/text gen-
      eration. This tool is very powerfull and will be mandatory in part 2 of
      the project. For now you could use a simpler solution, the feature "Exter-
      nal Java Action Call" (see the advanced tutorial of Sirius), to execute Java
      code that generates the PlantUML le. A similar approach can be used to
      generate a textual projection for DSL models.
      ·MPSYou may implement aBehaviorin MPS with the code that generates
      the PlantUML File. Then you can use anIntentionto provide a popup
      menu option that executes the Behavior upon user request. Alternatively
      you may use one the generation features of MPS:TextGen. Similar ap-
      proaches can be used to generate a textual projection for DSL models.
      ∗Add to the report (individual section) a description of the implementation of
      the visualizations/projections


2 Organization and Process

- Activity 7: Application Engineering
    - Team tasks:
      ∗Design models for the scenarios presented in Section 1.3.2
      ∗For the design of these models you may use the same notation as in UML
      object diagrams
      ∗Add to the report (team section) the design of the models
    - Individual tasks:
      ∗Implement the designed models in the selected tool
      ∗Check constraints and refactoring
      ∗For all the models include errors that are detected by constraints and include
      refactoring to correct them
      ∗Generate visualizations/projections for all the models
      ∗Add to the report (individual section) a description of the previous individual
      tasks

Note:Application engineering is about using the tools from domain engineering to build
new applications in the domain. For this rst part of the project, no real programming or
generation of applications is required for Application Engineering. Only the specic goals
presented for Activity 7.

### 2.5 Submission

By theend of week 7(specic date to be announced) all members of the team should submit
a copy of the team repository in Moodle (link to be announced).


```
Chapter
```
## 3 Domain Engineering

To help the fulllment of all the activities presented in Section 2.4 some hints and guidelines
are presented in this Chapter.

### 3.1 Domain Knowledge

Domain knowledge should be gathered essentially by researching the applications presented in
the scenarious that are to be supported: Youtube, Amazon and Reddit. For each application the
domain knwledge should be captured using, at least, a domain model and some complementary
text to justify options and include invariants and rules.
You should start by exploring and studying the applications with the focus on the specc
theme of the DSL, i.e., how these applications handle user evaluation and feedback. Take the
point of view of "someone" that is describing the applications using high level domain terms.
This is basically the same process as used to construct domain models, as in Domain-Driven
Design (DDD). Be awrare the tipically every application as strutural aspects (e.g. entities and
values that are required) as well as behavioral aspects (e.g., processes that operate on the en-
tities, invariants or rules). For instance, in Reddit, automations can be used to add specic
behaviour to its forums (see Figure 3.1). Other applucations, like Amazon and Youtube, usu-
ally provide at least some process for verication of user evaluations and comments.

### 3.2 Metamodel

After completing the previous activity, which resulted in domain models for each scenario, the
goal now is to design the metamodel for the new DSL.
The metamodel for the new DSL should:

- Result of the "union" of the previous domain models


3 Domain Engineering

```
Figure 3.1: Reddit Automations.
```
- This "union" must "merge" duplicated features
- The resulting metamodel should be concise but also complete regarding the identied
  features
- The resulting metamodel should also support all the presented aims of the project/DSL
- If properly justied, you may adapt the aims as well as add new features

### 3.3 Metamodel Constrains

Some constrains are easy to specify in class diagrams, such as, for instance, using the multi-
plicity in a relationship to constrain the number of referenced elements. However, some rules
or constraints are dicult, or even impossible, to specify using only class diagram features.
For instance:

- How to ensure that the values of a string eld must always start with a capitalized letter?
- How to ensure that entity A can not depend on itself? Such as when A depends on B
  and B depends on A.
- etc.


### 3.4 Model Transformations

For a model to be valid, all the domain rules must apply. Not only the model must be struc-
turally correct but it also must meet all the other constraints. Only valid models should be used.
For instance, only valid models should be used for the generation of code. This will ensure -
assuming the generation process is correct - that the generated code will also be correct.

You should identify all the constraints for your metamodel and specify them in a formal
way, for instance, using OCL (or at least using pseudo-code). If the tool you select for the
implementation supports specifying constraints you should use that feature. If the tool has
no direct support for that, you should implement the constraints in regular code and have a
method (entry point) that can be executed to verify the correctness of a model.

### 3.4 Model Transformations

One of the fundamental concepts of Model-Driven Engineering is Model Transformations.
Model transformations allow for generating target models (which also can be code) from
source models. One of the uses of model transformations is model refactoring, i.e, a trans-
formation where the source and target model are the same. Model refactoring can be used to
propose model transformations that may correct issues or errors found by model constraints.

For each constraint, when suitable, you should propose a model refactoring that could cor-
rect the problem. For instance, if you have a constraint that veries if an attribute starts with a
capitalize letter you should design a model refactoring that capitalizes the rst letter. Refactor-
ings should be presented in a formal way or using pseudo-code. If your tool has no support for
modeling refactorings you should implement them in regular code and have a method (entry
point) that can be called to run refactorings over a model.

### 3.5 Model Visualizations/Projections

Full edition of models of the DSL is only a goal for P2. However, one of the concerns of the
rst part of the project, is providing support for the automatic generation of model visualiza-
tions or projections. A projection is a representation of a model, or part of a model, at a given
moment. It is like a picture, it represents a model (or part of a model) at a given moment, and
it is read-only, non-editable. There should be two types of projections: textual and graphical.
The graphical projection should be a diagram that provides (in this case) a complete graphical
representation of the model. The textual projection, as it names implies, is a textual represen-
tation of the model. Students should propose specic graphical and textual representations for
each metamodel element. The specication of these representations should be included in the
report.
For the graphical projection you should use the PlantUML (Graphviz) tool to generate the
diagrams. For the textual representation the simple output of the text is sucient.


3 Domain Engineering

Basically, each student should research an API for his/her tool to support the handling of
models in a GPL (e.g., Java or C#) and generate the projection by visiting the nodes in the
model and generating the necessary output for the representation of the node. If your tool
supports generating "text/code" you can use that feature (i.e., and not use a more generic API).
Figure 3.1 presents an excerpt of a possible textual projection for a REF model (this is only an
example, your syntax may be signifcantly different).

Listing 3.1: Excerpt of possible textual projection for a REF model
USER TYPES : user , buyer IS user , seller
RESOURCE TYPE product : name AS TEXT , description AS TEXT , image AS IMAGE ,
WRITE seller , READ client
FEEDBACK -TYPE rateType : text AS TEXT , rate AS ONETOFIVE
FEEDBACK productReview : rateType , product , WRITE buyer , VALIDATION :
automatic: automaticProductReviewVerification(buyer , text , rate)
FEEDBACK TYPE commentType : text AS TEXT
FEEDBACK comment : commentType , recursive , WRITE user , VALIDATION :
automatic: automaticVerification(user , text)
...
For graphical projections, the student can generate the model diagram by "navigating" the
model and producing a PlantUML textual le that represents the diagram. You may use the
Dot language (supported by PlantUML, seehttps://graphviz.org/doc/info/lang.html)
to be able to generate specic graphical representations. Listing 3.2 presents the source code
of Plantuml that produces the graphical representation presented in Figure 3.2.Note that this
example is not related to the problem domain of the project, it is a simple illustration
on how to use platuml/dot to generate graphical projections

```
Listing 3.2: Example of Plantuml/dot source code for generating a diagram
@startuml
digraph foo {
start [shape=circle]
end [shape=circle]
init [shape=box , label="Init:\n Index=0 \n Max=LENGTH(Files )"]
cycle [shape=box , label="Cycle:\n Index=Index +1"]
testCycle [shape=diamond , label=" TestCycle: \n Index <=Max"]
iteraction [shape=box , label=" Iteraction: \n Result=DEL(Files[Index ])"]
testDel [shape=diamond , label=" TestDel: \n Result <0"]
deleted [shape=box , label=" Deleted: \n PRINT(’File Deleted ’)"]
error [shape=box , label="Error: \n PRINT(’Unable to Delete File ’)"]
start -> init
init -> cycle
cycle -> testCycle
testCycle -> iteraction [ label="true"]
testCycle -> end [ label =" false"]
iteraction -> testDel
testDel -> deleted [ label ="false "]
testDel -> error [ label="true"]
```

```
3.5 Model Visualizations/Projections
```
```
deleted -> cycle
error -> cycle
```
}
@enduml

```
Figure 3.2: An example diagram generated by Plantuml/dot
start
```
```
Init:
Max=LENGTH(Files) Index=0
```
```
end
```
```
Cycle:
Index=Index+1
```
```
TestCycle:
Index<=Max
```
```
false
Iteraction:
Result=DEL(Files[Index])
```
```
true
```
```
TestDel:
Result<0
```
```
Deleted:
PRINT(’File Deleted’)
```
```
false
Error:
PRINT(’Unable to Delete File’)
```
```
true
```


```
Chapter
```
## 4 Terms and conditions

### 4.1 Submission

All the developed artifacts of the project should be included in your team repository (according
to instructions).

For the Moodle submission a le containing a copy of the repository must be download from
Github and submitted in Moodle using a specic link (of Moodle, that will be provided later).

### 4.2 Report

All the documentation should be included in the repository, using Markdown, and specic
instructions included in the repository.

### 4.3 Deadline

Until 11:59pm of April, 18th

### 4.4 Feedback

Feedback can be request to the teacher at any moment, during the PL classes.

### 4.5 Evaluation

Evaluation for this part of the project will occur at the end of the semester, usually during lab
classes, during weeks 13 to 15.


4 Terms and conditions

Each Student must be prepared to explain, discuss, operate and demonstrate his/her indi-
vidual tasks and goals as well as the team’s tasks and goals. Further instructions on evaluation
sessions will be provided.
However, students may receive formative feedback during weeks 8 and 9, in the PL classes.

### 4.6 Grading

The weight of each part of the project will be provided in another document.
The evaluation of this project component has 2 parts:

- Individual (60%).This is specic to each team member and refers to his/her individual
  tasks and goals, in accordance to the performance of the student and his/her knowledge
  of the topics;
- Team (40%). This grade is related to the team’s tasks and goals. It may be different
  for each team member, in accordance to the performance of the student and his/her
  knowledge of the topics;

#### 4.6.1 Grading Criteria

A qualitative performance scale can be used by the students so that they can be aware of their
own performance. This scale will also be used by teacher to grade each goal or task (described
in Section 2.4)

```
Each task/goal can be graded following the next scale and the justication for each level:
```
- 0- nothing. No submission or irrelevant;
- 1- tentative. Do not achieve any of the requirements;
- 2- insucient. Achieves only a subset of the requirements, demonstrates insucient
  knowledge of the evaluation subjects;
- 3- acceptable. Achieves the requirements but with major faults, demonstrates accept-
  able knowledge of the evaluation subjects;
- 4- good. Achieves the requirements with minor faults, justies options, demonstrates
  good knowledge of the evaluation subjects;
- 5- excellent. Achieves completely the requirements, justies options, analyses alter-
  natives in a quantied and rigorous way, demonstrates outstanding knowledge of the
  evaluation subjects;


```
4.7 Code of Conduct
```
The nal grade for the project component results from the combination of the grades for all
the tasks/goals (individual and team) and then converted to a 0-20 scale. Although in the scale
only discrete values are presented (to facilitate the self-assessment by the student and also the
feedback), teachers may use all the possible numeric values in the range of the scale 0-5.

### 4.7 Code of Conduct

- Rulescf. "Regulamento Disciplinar dos Estudantes do IPP"
- Clearly identify sources and authorshipCode or any other material from external
  sources must be clearly identied in the code itself and in the reports, indicating the
  author or source.
- Anymisappropriation of authorship(or collusion in the developed work)will be
  sanctionedaccording to the regulation, e.g., the evaluation component will be canceled.
  Also, the incident will be reported to the President of ISEP.
- IA Tools usageIt is acceptable the usage of IA tools as a "research tool". However, it is
  expectd (and mandatory) that all submitted artifacts are the student’s authorship.